Earlier, we considered
the expression at Philippians 4:7,
“the peace of God
that surpasses all understanding,”
that is, the tranquility and calmness
we enjoy because we have
a close friendship with Jehovah.
What a remarkable blessing!
But although we enjoy God-given peace,
our life in this system of things
is not problem free, is it?
Psalm 34:19 acknowledges
as much when it says:
“Many are the hardships of the righteous one,
but Jehovah rescues him from them all.”
We may experience family opposition,
persecution, war, natural disasters,
or severe illnesses,
but none of these hardships
can “separate us from God’s love.”
“Neither death nor life nor angels
nor governments
nor things now here nor things to come”
—none of these things
can rob us of the peace Jehovah gives.
And yet, there is something that can.
Please turn with me to Isaiah 32:17.
And as we read this text,
notice that it refers to peace as a result.
Do you think of peace that way, as a result?
If peace is a result, what causes it?
Isaiah 32:17:
“The result
“of true righteousness will be peace,
“and the fruitage of true righteousness
will be lasting tranquility and security.”
What a beautiful expression,
“lasting tranquility and security”!
Again, from what does it result?
True righteousness.
What if righteousness
no longer mattered to us?
What if a person concluded:
‘It makes no difference
‘how I live or what sacrifices I make.
‘I’m going to suffer hardships either way.
I might as well do
whatever I please while I can’?
What’s wrong with that thinking?
Would it show appreciation for peace
and all that Jehovah
has done to make it possible?
Peace is a result.
And behind every result is a cause.
If we want peace,
we have to pursue righteousness.
An unrighteous person
cannot be at peace with God.
Serious transgressions put a strain
on a person’s relationship with God.
Recall King David’s words found
at Psalm 38:3.
Sensing Jehovah’s disapproval, he wrote:
“There is no peace
within my bones because of my sin.”
Inevitably, the unrighteous person
will reap what he sows and lose his peace.
What is righteousness,
and how do we pursue it?
Righteousness is what we have or what we show
when we do what is right
according to Jehovah’s standards.
And those standards
are not just rules we follow
but principles that guide the way
we deal with each other.
As Universal Sovereign and Creator,
Jehovah God determines what is righteous.
Isn’t that what was represented
by “the tree of the knowledge
of good and bad” in the garden of Eden?
As a result of Jehovah’s command
to abstain from its fruit,
that tree represented God’s right
to determine for his creatures
what is good and what is bad for them.
And although Jehovah
has given humans free will,
the right to choose,
he has not granted humans
(not even perfect ones)
the right to set the standard
for what is righteous and what is not.
Now, notice once again that Isaiah 32:17 says
that “the result
of true righteousness will be peace.”
It uses that term twice—“true righteousness.”
Not everything called righteousness
is true righteousness.
Many people view righteousness
as just a personal virtue
achieved by following the rules.
At Matthew 23:28,
Jesus said that the Pharisees
appeared righteous on the outside,
but inside they were lawless.
Ecclesiastes 7:16 talks about those
who think their standards
are more righteous even than God’s.
And at Romans 10:3,
Paul talked about people
who ‘seek to establish
their own righteousness.’
But false piety,
over-righteousness, and self-righteousness
are not what Isaiah 32:17 is talking about.
Today, many argue for the acceptance
of conduct that Jehovah forbids.
They may even find support
from a world already alienated from God.
But wide acceptance in a growing community
does not redefine righteousness.
None of that is true righteousness.
Our loving Creator sets
the standard for what is right
—not our feelings,
not the community at large.
Now, while you’re here in Isaiah,
please turn to chapter 48.
In order to be viewed as righteous,
we have to trust that Jehovah
should set the standard of right and wrong.
In addition, we must prove
by our speech and actions
that we agree with Jehovah’s standards
and obey him.
And that takes real courage
in a wicked world.
But when we do that, we enjoy the result.
Notice what it says at Isaiah chapter 48,
verses 17, 18:
“This is what Jehovah says, your Repurchaser,
“the Holy One of Israel:
“‘I, Jehovah, am your God,
“‘the One teaching you to benefit yourself
“‘[or as the footnote says, teaching you
“for your own good”],
“‘the One guiding you
in the way you should walk.
“‘If only you would pay attention
to my commandments!
“‘Then your peace
would become just like a river
and your righteousness
like the waves of the sea.’”
Paying attention to Jehovah’s commandments
results in two things.
First, our peace
will “become just like a river”
—serene, abundant, ongoing.
Second, our righteousness
will be “like the waves of the sea.”
Remember your last trip to the beach?
As you stood there on the shore,
perhaps on a high hill overlooking the ocean
watching the waves
roll in one after the other
just as they have for thousands of years,
could you feel a sense of constancy?
Jehovah says that our course
of doing what is right can be just like that.
He will guide us
in the path of righteousness.
He will bless us with unending peace.
In the process, we learn through experience
how Jehovah’s wise and loving ways
truly benefit us personally.
But if we refuse to do that,
we learn what agitation
and discord truly mean.
As verse 22 says:
“‘There is no peace,’ says Jehovah,
‘for the wicked.’”
It’s not a heavy-handed threat to manipulate
human behavior
as if Jehovah needed to do that.
It’s a fact, a truth, a timeless principle.
“God is love.”
He teaches us for our own good.
And the result if we pay attention is peace
—Isaiah 48:17, 18.
And these verses assure us
that imperfect humans
truly can have a righteous standing with God.
Let’s explore that further.
Do you recall the very first time
the word “righteous” is used in the Bible?
Turn with me, please, to Genesis chapter 6.
Now, you likely recognize this
as the account about Noah.
Noah lived in an extremely wicked world.
During his lifetime, rebel angels
left their assignments in heaven,
materialized, married human women,
and fathered hybrid offspring
who became violent giants.
Now, how did all of that wickedness
and violence affect Jehovah?
According to Genesis 6:6,
“his heart was saddened,”
which is a remarkable thing to contemplate,
isn’t it?
Jehovah’s feelings are affected
by our decisions because he cares for us.
That ancient world became so wicked
that Jehovah decided it must be destroyed.
And yet, right in the midst
of all this depravity,
Noah showed a different spirit.
Notice what it says at Genesis 6:8, 9:
“But Noah found favor in the eyes of Jehovah.
“This is the history of Noah.
Noah was a righteous man.”
There it is.
And why was he described as righteous?
“He proved himself faultless
among his contemporaries.”
Yes, Noah was not like the rebel angels
or their offspring
or like degraded human society.
“Noah walked with the true God.”
And thus the second time
we find the word “righteous”
is at Genesis 7:1:
“After that, Jehovah said to Noah:
“‘Go into the ark,
you and all your household,
“‘because you are the one
“‘I have found to be righteous
before me among this generation.’”
Because of Noah’s righteousness,
he and his family survived the Flood
to worship Jehovah on a cleansed earth.
And after the waters subsided
and the family emerged from the ark,
they witnessed a splendid sight,
one never before observed:
a serene, multicolored arch
in the sky
—a rainbow—
a reassuring indication
of peace with God,
peace resulting from righteousness.
And where does the word “righteous”
appear next in the Bible?
In the account about Abraham
—notably in his famous conversation
with Jehovah
found in Genesis chapter 18,
where Jehovah promised Abraham
that if he found
as few as ten righteous people
in the city of Sodom,
he would not destroy that city.
Now, what was it that distinguished Abraham
as righteous in that moral climate?
As you read Genesis chapters 12 through 22,
you get the sense that Abraham
was a man of great faith, unwavering faith.
He was ready to do whatever
Jehovah asked of him.
Now, citing Genesis 15:6
and other texts, James 2:23 says
that “‘Abraham put faith in Jehovah,
“‘and it was counted to him
“as righteousness,’
“and he came to be called Jehovah’s friend
“[Jehovah’s friend,
“peace with God resulting
from righteousness].”
Now, what about God’s people today?
Turn with me, please, to Isaiah chapter 60
—Isaiah chapter 60.
Jehovah refers to Noah
and Abraham as “righteous.”
But what would he say about you and me?
Well, notice what it says
toward the end of this chapter.
Isaiah chapter 60,
verses 21, 22:
“And all your people
“will be righteous;
“they will possess the land forever.
“They are the sprout that I planted,
“the work of my hands,
for me to be beautified.
“The little one will become a thousand
and the small one a mighty nation.
“I myself, Jehovah,
will speed it up in its own time.”
Yes, prospective members of the great crowd
have been declared righteous
as friends of God as Abraham was.
In Jehovah’s eyes, they are, as it says
in Revelation 7:9, “dressed in white robes.”
Today, they’re serving
alongside God’s spirit-anointed ones
who are declared righteous for life.
“Jehovah, [our] Repurchaser,
the Holy One of Israel,” has bought us back
from bondage to sin and death
through the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ.
And thus with faith
in the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ,
imperfect people are considered righteous
in the sight of God.
Now, in calling us righteous,
Jehovah God by means of Jesus
has done something for us
that we could not do
for ourselves in our imperfect condition.
But does that mean that we can do no wrong?
No, it does not mean that.
In order to maintain our peace,
we must cooperate with Jehovah.
Turn with me, please, to Romans chapter 1.
Now, like Noah and Abraham,
we live in a wicked and violent world
where we are exposed
to a spirit of disobedience.
Satan wants us to become part of this world
by adopting its unrighteous standards.
In the world, sexual immorality
is practiced without shame.
Homosexuals flaunt their conduct.
But Jehovah tells us
that homosexual acts are unrighteous.
God specifically warned the Israelites
against this and other forms of immorality.
Leviticus 18:22 says
that homosexual acts are “detestable.”
Does Jehovah still find it so offensive?
Well, notice what he inspired
for both Jews and non-Jews
in the Christian Greek Scriptures here
at Romans 1:26, 27:
“That is why God gave them over
“to disgraceful sexual passion,
“for their females changed the natural use
“of themselves into one contrary to nature;
“likewise also the males left
the natural use of the female
“and became violently inflamed
in their lust toward one another,
“males with males, working what is obscene
“and receiving
in themselves the full penalty,
which was due for their error.”
So Jehovah has not changed.
According to the Creator, homosexual acts
constitute disgraceful,
obscene error.
Some would disagree.
As verse 28 points out,
such ones do not consider it
worthwhile “to acknowledge God.”
But with what result?
As it says there,
“a disapproved mental state”
—just the opposite of peace.
And merely approving
of unrighteous conduct displeases Jehovah.
Notice how this is indicated in verse 32:
“Although these know full well
the righteous decree of God
“—that those practicing such things
are deserving of death—
“they not only keep on doing them
but also approve of those practicing them.”
Still, we do not hate individuals
who practice unrighteousness,
nor do we judge them.
On the contrary,
we share the good news with them.
We remember that we were all born
with the same infirmities
and have the same sinful tendencies.
But we also have
the same inherent spiritual need.
And thus, we recognize that others
can have the same peace,
the same privileges,
and the same prospects we enjoy
if they pay attention to Jehovah.
First Timothy 2:3, 4 says
that God’s “will is that all sorts of people
should be saved
and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.”
And people practicing
all manner of unrighteousness
have accepted the truth.
“That is what some of you were,”
1 Corinthians 6:11 says.
So we communicate impartially
with all our neighbors.
But we hate unrighteous conduct,
and we refuse to compromise Bible principles.
Now, sometimes moral issues
become the center
of heated political debates.
We avoid getting drawn
into such controversies.
But now, in practical terms,
what might that look like?
In the following video, notice how adults
can respond effectively when questioned
on highly controversial issues.
There you are.
Did you both get the email survey I sent?
And you’re both coming, right?
I must have missed it.
I was on calls all morning.
What’s this about?
Well, the whole office is leaving early.
We’re going downtown
to support the march
for gay rights.
She won’t go.
Why?
It’s against her religion.
Some of her people came by my house,
and when I asked, they said your church
won’t support gay marriage.
Irene?
It’s true.
As Jehovah’s Witnesses,
we hold to the Bible’s standard on marriage,
which is only between a man and woman.
And we remain politically neutral.
That’s such ignorant thinking.
I understand it’s a sensitive subject.
I have a daughter who deserves her rights!
Trust me, Amber,
as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
we believe everyone has a right
to choose how they live.
And I would never force my beliefs on anyone.
But you won’t go.
Just as I would never force
my beliefs on you,
all I ask is the same respect.
And, no, I won’t be going.
I have to go back to work.
Look, obviously, Irene,
I don’t agree with your perspective.
But I do appreciate
that you not push it on anyone else.
Thank you.
In contrast with the majority of mankind
who are divided,
true Christians are united.
We loyally support Jehovah’s right to rule.
We don’t set the standards,
and we’re not trying
to solve the world’s problems on our own.
We fully support God’s Kingdom.
Now, as we observed in the video,
moral and political issues
might be brought up in the workplace.
But more often our young ones,
even very young ones,
are confronted with these same topics.
How will they respond?
Are your young ones ready?
As you watch the next video,
notice how Olivia defends
Jehovah’s righteous standards.
Great discussion today, everyone.
Remember, midterms are this Friday.
No excuses!
That includes you, Jordan.
You were noticeably silent
during our discussion today, Olivia.
I was?
I guess I just didn’t have much to say.
Aren’t you concerned about gay rights?
Um,
well, it seems like a political issue,
and I stay neutral
when it comes to political stuff.
But it’s not a political issue.
This is a human rights issue.
Mr. Dallas,
she’s like crazy religious.
Hey!
There’s nothing wrong with that.
No, you don’t understand.
Jehovah’s Witnesses
hate everybody that isn’t straight.
That’s not true!
We don’t hate anyone.
I’ve spoken with your people before.
They seem big on equality.
We are.
The Bible says that ‘God isn’t partial.’
So we believe that everyone
should be treated fairly.
Good.
So I assume you have
gay members in your church.
No, we don’t.
But I thought you just said
everyone should be treated equally?
I’m confused.
Hah, called it!
Jordan, don’t you have a class to get to?
As I was saying,
how is that not a little hypocritical,
saying that you love everyone
and then excluding certain people?
Honestly, Mr. Dallas,
I’ve wondered the same thing.
OK.
And?
Well, I researched it in the Bible,
and I realized
that God accepts all people,
but he doesn’t accept all conduct.
What does that mean?
It means that you can’t be abusing drugs
and you can’t be stealing
or be violent and still be a Witness.
There are just certain actions
that God just doesn’t accept.
Including how someone expresses
their sexuality?
In some cases, yes.
We follow God’s standards
—not having sex without being married.
Well,
if that’s how you feel, that’s your right.
Personally, it seems a tad archaic to me
but to each their own.
Hey.
Does the Bible really say all that?
Yeah, it does.
OK,
maybe you can show me sometime.
Yeah, for sure.
Awesome.
So we can expect future installments
in this saga.
But did you notice how Olivia
was able to defend
Jehovah’s righteous standards?
She kept her peaceful spirit, didn’t she?
She acknowledged that she had
the same question as the teacher,
but she had done further
research on the subject.
And did you appreciate how she
subtly showed that Jehovah’s standards
benefit both the individual
and the community?
As examples, she highlighted
the avoidance of drug abuse and theft,
values she knew her teacher would appreciate.
Parents, are your young ones
able to explain why we do
or don’t do certain things?
Do you know how your children
really feel about Jehovah’s standards?
Are they obedient simply
to avoid making you mad?
If so, will that truly be enough?
Encourage your young ones
to prove to themselves
why Jehovah’s standards are wise.
Help them to see how they can explain
their choice to live by Jehovah’s standards.
Teach them how to resist pressure
to follow the world.
We are so thankful
that even during these
“critical times hard to deal with”
we can enjoy the inner peace
that Jehovah gives to the righteous.
But let’s remind ourselves of what Jehovah
promises to bring about
once Satan’s unrighteous system is removed.
Turn with me, please, to Psalm 37.
Here in these familiar verses,
we find a beautiful description
of what is to come.
And notice once again
how the Bible makes the correlation
between peace and righteousness
—Psalm 37:29.
Do you have it?
What does it say?
Who will possess the earth?
“The righteous.”
And for how long will they live on it?
“Forever.”
And then according to verse 11,
what will they find there?
“Peace.”
The result of true righteousness
will be peace.
And how much peace will they find?
a little peace?
just personal or family peace?
Remember, the righteous
already had peace with God,
even when wicked people still existed.
But what will Jehovah provide
to all those who continue loving him?
The abundance of peace.
And how will you feel about that?
Delighted or exquisitely delighted?
So stick with it, dear friends.
During this convention, be on the lookout
for the connection
between peace and righteousness.
Continue on the course of righteousness.
Help others to find “the way of peace.”
In that way, we can enjoy peace
with Jehovah now,
throughout the remainder of these last days,
and on into the future when Jesus
rules as King over a cleansed earth
in which “the righteous will flourish
and peace will abound.”